# GRAD521_DMPMedina_2021

Context of the project for this DMP:

After a century of protection and isolation from nearby mainland forests, Barro Colorado Island (BCI) has lost 30% of its original breeding bird species. To understand the cause of this decline, our research  proposes an assessment of how environmental conditions such as temperature, humidity, and precipitation influence loss of bird species in forests of Central Panama, particularly on BCI. We will analyze patterns of species loss with respect to physiological traits by non-invasively studying 248 species currently or historically residing in BCI and Soberania National Park (SNP) for mainland comparison. We will do so by measuring the physical characteristics of museum specimens and recording environmental conditions at selected locations. After associating species loss with altered climatic conditions, we will generate projection models that assess species vulnerability to future changes in climate. 

Data Description:
Our analysis will require the relationship between two datasets that we intend to collect separately. The first data we will collect is the bird physiology data, which includes measurements of body length, width, height, body mass, feather length, feather depth, feather absorptance, and feather reflectance. All body measurements will be taken with a measuring tape and body mass will be obtained from the VerNet website since we cant obtain body mass from collection specimens. Feather reflectance and absorptance will be obtained using a spectroradiometer, tungsten halogen light, and a reflection probe holder. Measurements will be taken on three individual birds for 280 bird species and will be recorded as a numerical value. We will obtain these measurements from specimens at the Smithsonian, the American Museum of Natural History, Louisiana State University, and other collections with tropical specimens available. For the collection process we are creating a data sheet for us to record measurements by hand and then entering it to an Excel spreadsheet. This data will probably take less than 1-2 GB of space. 
The second data set we will collect is environmental data in order to complete our biophysical models. Our environmental data will be collected in Central Panama at Barro Colorado Island and Soberania National Park. We will compare the environmental conditions on Barro Colorado Island, where many species have been lost, with the adjacent Soberania National Park, where they have not. We will collect data during seasonal extremes, focusing on April, the hot and dry month, and September, a wetter and cooler month. We expect to collect measurements for temperature and humidity using Measurement Computing USB-500-LCD temperature/humidity loggers distributed in random locations. On selected sites, loggers will also be placed vertically at three height categories: ground (<1 m); understory (>1 m but below the canopy); and canopy (top level of vegetation regardless of height). Temperature and humidity will be recorded everyday for the entire month of fieldwork. Our data will be recorded with the loggers so we can input the data straight into the computer. However, we do expect to regularly check the loggers to ensure they are working properly.

Roles and Responsibilities 
As the lead researcher of the project, I, Ana Medina, am responsible for the implementation of the data management plan. Since I am the only graduate student working on this project, I am also responsible for organizing and properly storing the data. As for the data collection process, we do expect to have interns working with our team who are properly trained by both myself and the principal investigator. Therefore, data collection will be the responsibility of everyone recruited for the field season. In the data collection process, everyone, including myself, will have equal responsibility and have to implement the same tasks for consistency. Quality control and data analysis will be the responsibility of both myself and the PI since it is a process we will be doing together to ensure the highest standard for the results. Since I am only an MS student, long term preservation of data will be the responsibility of the PI. Data preservation plans and access control are subject to change depending on what grants we are selected for or not. As of now, our project is only subjected to OSU’s guide and regulations of data management. Considering that the leading team is only constituted by the principal investigator and myself, there is not a big concern about our roles shifting dramatically during the course of this project. 

Data Classification
According to OSU’s guidelines, there are three types of data classification: unrestricted, sensitive, and confidential. The data we intend to collect does not include any human subjects, financial or legal information, etc. Our data will mostly consist of environmental data and bird body measurements that could be dispersed through several communication channels, including but not limited to journal publications, website upload, and news release. Therefore our data would be classified as unrestricted while still following university/grant institution’s guidelines for sharing it in an appropriate manner. As mentioned above, data accessibility might change in the future depending on the grants we are able to obtain. No extraordinary guidelines have been considered at this point since the data is neither sensitive nor confidential.

Data Storage and Backup Strategy
Our raw data will be stored in a OSU managed Box file shared by the PI and myself. It will also be stored in the lab’s computer for continued use. Our data will also be stored in two hard drives that will be stored in our lab’s facilities within OSU. One hard drive will be designated for our environmental data and the second hard drive for our physiology data. The physiology data will be enclosed within an excel file and the environmental data will be stored in the Measurement Computing Software needed for the loggers that record said data. The drive containing our raw environmental data will also contain an excel file where all the data has been entered. Backing up our data will be a manual process since all data will be individually uploaded to each place. Icloud storage is currently being discussed with the principal investigator to ensure maximum storage of our data. Extra precautions are being considered since our environmental data is being collected in a foreing country and limited funds are available for our travel and collection process. 
